



Network Working Group                                        E. Rescorla
Internet-Draft                                               Independent
Intended status: Informational                             30 March 2026
Expires: 1 October 2026


        Anonymous Authorization and Rate Limiting for Web Agents
               draft-rescorla-anonymous-webbotauth-latest

Abstract

   Automated agents ("bots") represent a large fraction of the traffic
   to many Web sites.  In some cases, this traffic is desired, in others
   undesired, and in yet others, desired as long as it remains within
   certain rate limits.  This memo describes a system that allows Web
   site operators to distinguish wanted from unwanted traffic, while not
   tying a given request to a specific sender.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://ekr.github.io/draft-rescorla-anonymous-webbotauth/draft-
   rescorla-anonymous-webbotauth.html.  Status information for this
   document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   rescorla-anonymous-webbotauth/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ekr/draft-rescorla-anonymous-webbotauth.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 1 October 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Architectural Overview
     2.1.  Rate Limiting
     2.2.  Issuer Hiding
   3.  Issuance Models
     3.1.  Independent Issuers
     3.2.  Server as Issuer
     3.3.  Number of Issuers
   4.  Relationship to Existing Technologies
   5.  Use Case Analysis
     5.1.  Mitigating Volumetric Abuse by Bots
     5.2.  Controlling Access by Bots
     5.3.  Providing Different Content to Bots
     5.4.  Auditing Bot Behavior
     5.5.  Classifying Traffic
     5.6.  Authenticating Site Services
   6.  Conventions and Definitions
   7.  Security Considerations
     7.1.  Anonymity Set
     7.2.  Credential Misuse
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  References
     9.1.  Normative References
     9.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Automated agents ("bots") represent a large fraction of the traffic
   to many Web sites.  For example, Wikimedia reports that about 35% of
   its traffic is from bots [PCMag-Wikipedia] and Cloudflare reports
   that over 50% of traffic is automated [Cloudflare-2025].  High
   traffic loads--even when from otherwise desired bots--can have
   negative impacts on sites in terms of performance, stability, and
   operational costs.

   In addition, there may be certain types of bot traffic that sites
   which to heavily restrict or block entirely.  For example:

   *  Volumetric traffic intended to create a DoS attack on the site.

   *  Non-volumetric traffic intended to attack the site.

   *  Scraping for specific purposes such as training AI agents.

   [I-D.nottingham-webbotauth-use-cases] provides a more complete list
   of potential use cases.

   The traditional way that websites discriminate between clients is
   with client authentication.  Sites can use behavioral analysis to
   determine when traffic from a given endpoint appears bot-like (e.g.,
   is high volume, has low latency between requests, appears to be
   retrieving the entire site, etc.) and restrict access by those
   endpoints unless they authenticate and the resulting identity is
   acceptable to the site.  [I-D.meunier-webbotauth-registry] describes
   one such architecture, where identities are rooted in the DNS and
   bots use digital signatures to tie their activitity to a given
   identity.

   While directly identifying each bot allows the site to precisely
   monitor bots' behavior and restrict or block bots that it believes
   are misbehaving, it also has potential negative effects on the open
   Web, including:

   *  Allowing sites to precisely discriminate against specific bots,
      even when those bots are acting in the public interest.  For
      example:

      -  Government sites might block bots which are tracking law
         enforcement activity.

      -  Employment or housing sites might block bots which are
         monitoring for discriminatory behavior.

      -  Shopping sites might block bots used for price comparison.

   *  Preventing users and groups from being able to anonymously
      retrieve Web content using automated tools.

   In many use cases, it is possible to resolve this tension using
   anonymous credentials.  When a bot presents an anonymous credential,
   the Web site learns that the bot is part of some set of authorized
   bots -- say those whose operators have agreed to good behavior -- and
   not the specific identity of the bot or the bot operator.

   This document describes an architecture for using anonymous
   credential to authenticate bots to websites.  In addition to laying
   out how the system works, we describe the trade-offs between
   anonymity and fine-grained abuse mitigation.

2.  Architectural Overview

   The overall idea, is shown in Figure 1:

   Alice         Bob           Issuer             Site

   Register --------------------->
   <------------------ Cred[Alice]
                 Register ------->
                   <---- Cred[Bob]

   Request + Cred ----------------------------------->
                                Site only knows Issuer,
                                      not Alice or Bob
   <------------------------------------------Response

                      Figure 1: Architectural Overview

   Prior to contacting the site, Alice and Bob both register with a
   credential Issuer.  They each are issued an anonymous credential,
   which they can use to authenticate to the server.  What makes the
   credential anonymous is that the site only learns that someone with a
   credential from the Issuer is authenticating, not whether it's Alice
   or Bob. This prevents the site from discriminating _between_
   customers of the same issuer, although it can discriminate between
   issuers.

   As a result, while it is possible to distinguish authenticated from
   unauthenticated bots, it is not possible to use the authentication
   method to either (1) selectively block individual bots or (2)
   determine which bots are accessing which resources.  It may still be
   possible to identify bots via other mechanisms such as IP address or
   fingerprinting.

   In some cases it may be sufficient merely to identify the issuer, for
   instance if the issuer performs some vetting to ensure policy
   compliance.  However, in some cases this may be insufficient, as
   discussed below.

2.1.  Rate Limiting

   In some cases it may be desirable to limit any individual agent to a
   specific number of requests.  For example:

   *  A given issuer may have a large number of subscribers but only a
      few may access a given site.  In this case, overall rate limits
      for an issuer will not be effective, but individual rate limits
      are.

   *  A given issuer may have multiple tiers of subscribers that have
      undergone different amounts of vetting and therefore should be
      allowed to offer different amounts of load.  Individual rate
      limits permit this while maintaining a large anonymity set.

2.2.  Issuer Hiding

   Conversely, in some cases, it is desirable to conceal which of a set
   of issuers issued a credential.  As a concrete example, the IETF
   PrivacyPass WG is designing anonymous credentials that can be issued
   to individuals indicating that they have passed some set of checks
   indicating that they represent a human.  As discussed below, it may
   be possible to use the same type of credential for PrivacyPass and
   for anonymous bot authentication, even if the issuers for those
   credentials are different.  A site which accepts both credentials for
   users and bots does not necessarily need to know which type of user a
   given request comes from--as long as there is some rate limiting to
   prevent individual credentials from being used for large scale bot
   activity--in which case it may be desirable to instead show that a
   user has a valid credential from _either_ the issuer for user or the
   issuer for bots without revealing which.

3.  Issuance Models

   Anonymous credentials are compatible with a variety of issuance
   models, as discussed in this section.

3.1.  Independent Issuers

   Probably the most natural approach is to have one or more independent
   issuers, each of which publishes the policy that it uses to issue
   credentials (e.g., verifying corporate existence, subject pays $100,
   etc.).  Sites can then select which issuers have policies they are
   willing to accept.  It is also possible to have multiple issuers who
   conform to a common set of policies, as in the WebPKI, where each CA
   has to meet the same requirements, but site operators have the choice
   of which CA to use.

3.2.  Server as Issuer

   It is also possible for servers to act as their own issuer.  This is
   not likely to be practical for small sites, as bots will simply opt
   not to authenticate to those sites at all.  However, a large CDN
   which hosts many sites might opt to operate its own issuer, and it
   could be practical for bots to register with such an issuer.

3.3.  Number of Issuers

   In general, it is desirable to have for bots to be able to acquire a
   relatively small number of credentials and have high confidence that
   those credentials will be compatible with most if not all of the
   sites that the bot wishes to contact.  This can be most
   straightforwardly accomplished if there is only a small number of
   issuers, but it can also work if there are a larger number of issuers
   but sites converge on a relatively small number of policies
   (expressed as which issuers they support) such that a bot can acquire
   a set of credentials that covers all of those policies.  The least
   desirable outcome is if bots routinely are prompted to provide
   credentials for a new issuer.

4.  Relationship to Existing Technologies

   There is significant overlap with existing work on anonymous
   authentication happening in the PrivacyPass WG and in the W3C
   AntiFraud Community Group.  While that work is directed towards
   access control for users, the same cryptographic techniques can be
   used to authenticate bots.  A good description of the vision and
   requirements can be found at [PACT-Issue].  There are a number of
   potential cryptographic techniques that can be used to issue
   anonymous rate-limited credentials including Anonymous Credit Tokens
   (ACT) [I-D.schlesinger-cfrg-act] and Anonymous Rate Limited
   Credentials (ARC) [I-D.yun-cfrg-arc].  Katz and Sefranek
   [IACR-2025-2080] have published techniques for hiding which issuer
   out of a set of issuers was associated with a given credential.

   The ideal scenario would be to be able to use compatible tokens for
   users and bots, differing only in the issuance policies, the issuers,
   and the rate limits.

5.  Use Case Analysis

   [I-D.nottingham-webbotauth-use-cases] describes a set of use cases
   for web bot authentication.  The architecture described in this
   document address some but not all of these use cases.  This is
   intentional rather than a deficiency; the objective is to address use
   cases which are compatible with limiting the negative impact of bots
   while avoiding making it trivial for sites to discriminate against
   individual bots.  The remainder of this section addresses each use
   case individually.

5.1.  Mitigating Volumetric Abuse by Bots

   This document directly addresses the topic of volumetric abuse,
   because bots can be authenticated and authenticated bots can be
   restricted to specific bandwidth limits.  Once a bot has exceeded its
   limit, it can be blocked.

5.2.  Controlling Access by Bots

   [I-D.nottingham-webbotauth-use-cases] provides the following example
   applications of controlling access:

      -  Only allow access by bots on an allow list;

      -  Disallow access to bots on an explicit deny list;

      -  Condition access upon meeting some criteria (e.g., non-profit,
         certification by a third party);

      -  Condition access upon participation in some scheme or protocol
         (e.g., payment for access);

   As noted by the draft:

      Note that the first two imply some notion of bots being tied to a
      real-world identity, whereas the remaining do not necessarily
      require it.

   In general, the architecture in this document can potentially used
   for the second two use cases and can be used for some versions of the
   first two use cases.  Specifically, because allow and deny lists are
   enforced at the issuer, any given allow or deny list needs to be
   fairly widely used--or at least used at a big site--in order to be
   practical.  For instance, an issuer could have the policy not to
   issue to any bot which was illegal to do business with in a given
   jurisdiction, because many sites might be interested in such a
   policy, but a policy where a site doesn't want to allow access by a
   direct competitor is more difficult to execute.

5.3.  Providing Different Content to Bots

   The architecture in this document may be usable to provide different
   content to bots generally than humans depending on the structure of
   issuers (e.g., does a given issuer issue to both bots and to humans)
   and whether techniques are used to conceal which issuer is in use.
   However, they are not generally useful to provide different ocntent
   to specific bots.

5.4.  Auditing Bot Behavior

   This use case is not addressed by this document.

5.5.  Classifying Traffic

   Because this use case does not depend on determining which bot is
   which, but only which traffic is human versus bot, the architecture
   in this document may be able to address this use case, depending on
   the ultimate deployment model, in particular whether bots and humans
   use different issuers and whether the issuer is concealed.

5.6.  Authenticating Site Services

   This use case is not addressed by this document.

6.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

7.  Security Considerations

   The precise security and privacy details of a system of this type
   depend on the cryptographic mechanism being deployed.  However, it is
   possible to make some general observations.

7.1.  Anonymity Set

   The anonymity set for a given transaction is the set of credentials
   associated with a given issuer, or, if issuer hiding is used, the set
   of credentials associated with the set of issuers.  However, it is
   still possible to learn information about the client by manipulating
   the issuer set.  For example, a site acting as an issuer could use
   different keys for each user or a site could use different issuer
   subsets to identify which of a set of issuers was in use.
   Transparency/consistency mechansims like
   [I-D.ietf-privacypass-key-consistency] may be useful in detecting
   this form of attack.

7.2.  Credential Misuse

   Because clients are anonymous, some forms of misuse are harder to
   manage.  For example:

   *  Two clients can collude to exceed rate limits if they are
      interacting with disjoint sites.

   *  If registration standards are low and registration is cheap a bot
      can obtain multiple credentials.

   *  Patterns of misuse (e.g., credential stuffing) become harder to
      detect.

   Note that existing mechanisms, such as IP address, will continue to
   be usable, but the techniques described in this document may not add
   to the server's ability to address these issues.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [Cloudflare-2025]
              Cloudflare, "Cloudflare 2025 Year in Review", 2025,
              <https://radar.cloudflare.com/year-in-review/2025>.

   [I-D.ietf-privacypass-key-consistency]
              Davidson, A., Finkel, M., Thomson, M., and C. A. Wood,
              "Key Consistency and Discovery", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-privacypass-key-consistency-01,
              10 July 2023, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-privacypass-key-consistency-01>.

   [I-D.meunier-webbotauth-registry]
              Guerreiro, M., Kirazci, U., and T. Meunier, "Registry and
              Signature Agent card for Web bot auth", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-meunier-webbotauth-registry-01, 20
              October 2025, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-meunier-webbotauth-registry-01>.

   [I-D.nottingham-webbotauth-use-cases]
              Nottingham, M., "Use Cases for Authentication of Web
              Bots", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-nottingham-
              webbotauth-use-cases-01, 18 January 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-nottingham-
              webbotauth-use-cases-01>.

   [I-D.schlesinger-cfrg-act]
              Schlesinger, S. and J. Katz, "Anonymous Credit Tokens",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schlesinger-cfrg-
              act-01, 13 February 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-schlesinger-
              cfrg-act-01>.

   [I-D.yun-cfrg-arc]
              Yun, C. and C. A. Wood, "Anonymous Rate-Limited
              Credentials", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-yun-
              cfrg-arc-01, 6 August 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-yun-cfrg-arc-
              01>.

   [IACR-2025-2080]
              Katz, J. and M. Sefranek, "Issuer Hiding for BBS-Based
              Anonymous Credentials", 10 November 2025,
              <https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/2080>.

   [PACT-Issue]
              Jackson, D., "Private Access Control Tokens", 2 December
              2025,
              <https://github.com/antifraudcg/proposals/issues/22>.

   [PCMag-Wikipedia]
              Kan, L., "Wikipedia Faces Flood of AI Bots That Are
              'Eating Bandwidth,' Raising Costs", 14 February 2024,
              <https://www.pcmag.com/news/wikipedia-faces-flood-of-ai-
              bots-that-are-eating-bandwidth-raising-costs>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Eric Rescorla
   Independent
   Email: ekr@rtfm.com
